:memo: How to - Sanitizing Databases (#2089)
platformsh/platformsh-docs: docs/src/development/sanitize-db.md

-->

When using the branching feature on platform.sh, your production database gets copied to each new branch.
This is very helpful to test directly if your latest code changes work as expected.
However, in some cases, branching, or copying data from production to non-production (staging, ...) environments might require sanitizing the database.

Sanitizing a database has several benefits: 
- Removing Personally Identifiable Information (PII) from the database avoids unauthorized access to sensitive data.
- Reducing the database size helps reducing the strains on the infrastructure (since non-production environments usually have less resources available than production).

## Before you begin

This guide is about sanitizing databases.
This guide doesn't address input validation and sanitization, however it's a topic worth checking out.
The [Open Web Application Security Project (OWASP) cheat sheet](https://cheatsheetseries.owasp.org/cheatsheets/Input_Validation_Cheat_Sheet.html#goals-of-input-validation) offers a (free) introduction on that topic. 
The `log4j` security vulnerability is an example of what missing input sanitization can cause as issues.

> Prior experience using git and [MySQL databases](/configuration/services/mysql.md) is recommended.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Prior experience using git and [MySQL databases](../configuration/services/mysql/_index.md) is recommended.
```
Similarly with other links.

- if you aren't using Drupal, you will need the [Platform CLI](/development/cli/_index.md#cli-command-line-interface) installed locally.
- if you are using Drupal, you will need [Drush](https://www.drush.org/latest/install/) installed.

This guide is about sanitizing MySQL databases.

This guide doesn't address:

- Sanitizing NoSQL Databases ([MongoDB](../configuration/services/mongodb/_index.md), ...)
- Input validation and input sanitization, which both help prevent security vulnerabilities

## Sanitize the database

Make sure that you only sanitize development environments and **never** the production environment.
Otherwise you may lose most or even all of the relevant data stored in your database.

First, take a [database dump](../configuration/services/mysql/_index.md#exporting-data) of your development environment.
You won't alter your production data. This is just a safety precaution.
To get a database dump, run: `platform db:dump -e <DEVELOPMENT_ENVIRONMENT_NAME>`.

{{< codetabs >}}

---
title=Manually
file=none
highlight=false
---

Assumptions:

- `user` is the table where all of your PII is stored.

> - `user` is a part of the `staging` development database.

Reviewer: The SQL query is `SELECT * FROM users;`, which seems to indicate the table name is `users`.

It might also help to combine the two points into one since they relate to the same table. :shrug:

- `staging` is an exact copy of your production database.

1. Connect to the `staging` database by running `platform sql -e staging`.

> 1. Display all fields from your `user` table, to select which ones need to be redacted.

Reviewer: Again, the query seems to indicate it should be `users`

   In a very basic database, this can be achieved with the `SELECT * FROM users;` MySQL query:

   ```sql
    MariaDB [main]> SELECT * FROM users;

>     +----+------------+---------------+---------------------------+---------------+

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Run the following MySQL query:

   ```sql
    MariaDB [main]> SELECT * FROM users;
    ```

   You see output like the following:

   ```sql
    +----+------------+---------------+---------------------------+---------------+
```

To distinguish input and output.

---
title: Sanitize databases
description: Remove sensitive information from databases on non-production environments to control access.
---

When working on a new feature on your website, you want to use a new branch.
Using a new branch makes sure that you don't risk breaking your live, production website.

Creating a branch on Platform.sh copies both the code and the database to that new development branch.
These code and database changes need to be tested before being merged into production.
Depending on your processes, internal or external teams may interact with the development environment branch.

Databases of live websites often contain personally identifiable information (PII)
such as full names, mailing addresses, and phone numbers.
To ensure people reviewing the code changes can't access information they shouldn't, sanitize the database of any PII that it may contain.

## Before you begin

You need:

- A project with a [MySQL database](../configuration/services/mysql/_index.md).

> - if you aren't using Drupal, you will need the [Platform CLI](/development/cli/_index.md#cli-command-line-interface) installed locally.
> - if you are using Drupal, you will need [Drush](https://www.drush.org/latest/install/) installed.

Reviewer: Maybe some something like:
```suggestion
- A command interface installed:
  - With Drupal: [Drush](https://www.drush.org/latest/install/)
  - Without Drupal: the [Platform CLI](/development/cli/_index.md#cli-command-line-interface)
```
Not 100% necessary, just seems shorter so maybe clearer?

At the very least, without the future tense and no periods at the end of the list items.

Alternatively, if you are using Drupal, you will need:

- A project with a [MySQL database](../configuration/services/mysql/_index.md)
- [Drush](https://www.drush.org/latest/install/) installed

This guide is about sanitizing MySQL databases.

This guide doesn't address:

- Sanitizing NoSQL Databases ([MongoDB](../configuration/services/mongodb/_index.md), ...).
- Input validation or input sanitization which are both causes for security vulnerabilities.

## Sanitize the database

Make sure that you only sanitize development environments and **never** on the production environment.
Otherwise you may lose most or even all of the relevant data stored in your database.

First, let's take a [database dump](../configuration/services/mysql/_index.md#exporting-data) of your development environment.
You won't alter your production data. This is just a safety precaution.

> To get a database dump, run: `platform db:dump -e <name of your development environment>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To get a database dump, run: `platform db:dump -e <DEVELOPMENT_ENVIRONMENT_NAME>`.
```

{{< codetabs >}}

---
title=Manually
file=none
highlight=false
---

Assumptions:

> - `user` is the table where all your PII is stored.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `user` is the table where all of your PII is stored.
```

Reviewer: I still feel like "X is the place where" for all three of these list items is a more complicated way of putting it. :shrug: I would expect the object first to know the context. But it's probably understandable either way.

- `user` is a part of the `staging` development database.
- `staging` is an exact copy of your production database.

> 1. Connect to the `staging` database with `platform sql -e staging`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Connect to the `staging` database by running `platform sql -e staging`.
```
Otherwise it slightly looks at first glance like the connection is to the command

1. Display all fields from your `user` table, to select which ones need to be redacted.
   In a very basic database, this can be achieved with the `SELECT * FROM users;` MySQL query:

   ```sql

>    MariaDB [main]> SELECT * FROM users;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   $ MariaDB [main]> SELECT * FROM users;
```

Author: That isn't fully correct since the line is cleared by MySQL, here's the full output:
```
vagrant:~/ $ platform sql -e staging                                                                                                                                                                                             

Welcome to the MariaDB monitor.  Commands end with ; or \g.
Your MariaDB connection id is 3986
Server version: 10.4.22-MariaDB-1:10.4.22+maria~buster mariadb.org binary distribution

Copyright (c) 2000, 2018, Oracle, MariaDB Corporation Ab and others.

Type 'help;' or '\h' for help. Type '\c' to clear the current input statement.

MariaDB [main]> MariaDB [main]> SELECT * FROM users;
```

Reviewer: The point is to distinguish user input from output. The Google style guide [suggests](https://developers.google.com/style/code-syntax?hl=en#prompt) even separate blocks, so we can go with that in this case where the command prompt isn't naturally there.

>    In a very basic database, this can be achieved with the `SELECT * FROM users;` MySQL query:
> 
>    ```sql
>    MariaDB [main]> SELECT * FROM users;
>    +----+------------+---------------+---------------------------+---------------+

Reviewer: ````suggestion
   Run the following MySQL query:

   ```sql
   MariaDB [main]> SELECT * FROM users;
   ```

   You see output like the following:

   ```sql
   +----+------------+---------------+---------------------------+---------------+
````

To distinguish input from output.

   +----+------------+---------------+---------------------------+---------------+
   |  1 | admin      | admin         | admin@yourcompany.com     | admin         |
   |  2 | john       | doe           | john.doe@gmail.com        | john          |
   |  3 | jane       | doe           | janedoe@ymail.com         | jane          |
   +----+------------+---------------+---------------------------+---------------+
   3 rows in set (0.00 sec)
   ```

1. Change the fields where PII Data is contained with the [`UPDATE` statement](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/update.html).
   For example, changing the first name of an user, when the email address is not using the company domain, would result in the following query:

   ```sql
   UPDATE user
   SET first_name='redacted'
   WHERE email NOT LIKE '%@yourcompany%'
   ```

   Adapt and run that query for all fields that you need to sanitized.
   If you modify fields that you shouldn't alter,
   [you can restore them](../administration/backup-and-restore.md#restore) from the dump you took in step 1.

   You can create a script to automate the sanitization process to be run automatically on each new deployment.

>    Once you have a working script, add your script to sanitize the database to [a `deploy` hook](../user_guide/reference/platform-app-yaml.html#hooks):

Reviewer: This link should be different.

    ```yaml
    deploy: |

>       cd /app/public

Reviewer: The indentation for YAML file examples should be 4 spaces.

      if [ "$PLATFORM_ENVIRONMENT_TYPE" = production ]; then
        # Do whatever you want on the production site.
      else
        # The sanitization of the database should happen here (since it's non-production)
        sanitize_the_database.sh
      fi
    ```

<--->

---
title=With Drupal and Drush
file=none
highlight=false
---

1. To sanitize your database and get rid of sensitive, live information, use the `drush sql:sanitize` command.
Add the sanitization of the database script in [your hook](../user_guide/reference/platform-app-yaml.html#hooks) for the non-production environment:

  ```yaml
  deploy: |
    cd /app/public
    if [ "$PLATFORM_ENVIRONMENT_TYPE" = production ]; then
      # Do whatever you want on the production site.
    else
      drush -y sql:sanitize
    fi
    drush -y updatedb
  ```

More options are available. These are described in [Drush's documentation](https://www.drush.org/latest/commands/sql_sanitize/).

{{< /codetabs >}}

## What's next

You learned how to remove sensitive data from a database.

> To replace sensitive data that with more meaningful data, you can add a `faker` to the process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To replace sensitive data that with other meaningful data, you can add a `faker` to the process.
```
A good formulation, but the faked data isn't _more_ meaningful than the original, sensitive data.

---
title: Sanitize databases on non-production environments
sidebarTitle: Sanitize databases
description: Find out how to sanitize databases on non-production environments.
---

<!-- 
When to use
  When there is a single outcome a user wants to achieve.
  When you want to explain how to get to the outcome in ordered steps.
  https://diataxis.fr/how-to-guides/ 

How to use
  1. Copy this template into the right directory in /src/docs/.
  2. Rename it to match the title.
  3. Replace the following content with your own.
-->

When creating or pushing a branch to Platform.sh, both the code and the database get inherited to a new branch.
Depending on your processes, internal or external teams may check the code changes on that new branch.

Databases of live websites often contain Personally Identifiable Information (PII) such as full name, mailing addresses, ... .
To avoid any unauthorized access to PII on the development environment, you can sanitize the database.

## Before you begin

This guide is about sanitizing databases.

> This guide doesn't address neither input validation nor input sanitization, an introduction to these topics can be found in the (free) [Open Web Application Security Project (OWASP) cheat sheet](https://cheatsheetseries.owasp.org/cheatsheets/Input_Validation_Cheat_Sheet.html#goals-of-input-validation).

Reviewer: Also remember to add `sanitization` to accepted words if you want to use it.

The `log4j` security vulnerability is an example of what missing input sanitization can cause.

NoSQL Databases ([MongoDB](../configuration/services/mongodb/_index.md), ...) can benefit from sanitization but for the sake of simplicity, 
these use cases won't be covered in this guide.

You'll need:

> - a project that uses a [MySQL database](../configuration/services/mysql/_index.md),
> - the [Platform CLI](/development/cli/_index.md#cli-command-line-interface) installed locally.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A project with a [MySQL database](../configuration/services/mysql/_index.md)
- The [Platform CLI](/development/cli/_index.md#cli-command-line-interface) installed locally
```
https://developers.google.com/style/lists?hl=en#numbered-lettered-bulleted-lists

Reviewer: Also, the CLI isn't necessary for the version with Drush. So maybe an "or" with that here?

> ## Sanitize the Database

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Sanitize the database
```

> Make sure that the sanitization only runs on the development environments and **never** on the production environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Make sure that you only sanitize development environments and **never** on the production environment.
```
Again, think about "development" or not. But generally, verbs are clearer than nouns like "sanitization".

> Otherwise you will loose most — if not all — of the relevant data stored in your database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Otherwise you may lose most or even all of the relevant data stored in your database.
```
"if not all" is a nice phrase but not the most clear one for an international audience. Especially things with negatives can be hard.

{{< codetabs >}}

---
title=Manually
file=none
highlight=false
---

Assumptions:

- `staging` is the name of the database that you want to sanitize.
- The `staging` database is an exact copy of your production database.

> - `user` is the table where all your PII is stored.

Reviewer: I feel like this would be shorter and maybe clearer in reverse order. Something like:
* You want to sanitize a database named `staging`.

But maybe the code at the start works :thinking:

> 1. As a safety precaution, take a [database dump](../configuration/services/mysql.md#exporting-data). Run `platform db:dump -e staging` to get a database dump of your staging environment,

Reviewer: It'd be nice to use semantic line breaks.
I feel like the second half of the second sentence is kind of unnecessary as it's just repeating the purpose. If it were to be included, I'd have it at the start: https://developers.google.com/style/clause-order?hl=en

But definitely have a period at the end.

> 1. Connect to the `staging` database with `platform sql -e staging`,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Connect to the `staging` database with `platform sql -e staging`.
```

1. Display all fields from your `user` database with `SELECT * FROM users;`.

>    Which could result in something along the lines of:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   This results in something like the following:
```

   ```sql

>    MariaDB [main]> SELECT * FROM users;

Reviewer: If the code example includes the command, I would word its introduction differently.

   +----+------------+---------------+---------------------------+---------------+
   | ID | first_name | last_name     | user_email                | display_name  |
   +----+------------+---------------+---------------------------+---------------+
   |  1 | admin      | admin         | admin@yourcompany.com     | admin         |
   |  2 | john       | doe           | john.doe@gmail.com        | john          |
   |  3 | jane       | doe           | janedoe@ymail.com         | jane          |
   +----+------------+---------------+---------------------------+---------------+
   3 rows in set (0.00 sec)
   ```

1. Change the fields where PII Data is contained with [`UPDATE` Queries](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/update.html).

>    For example, changing the first name of an user, when the email address is not using the company domain, would result in the following query:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   For example, to change the first name of a user with an email address not in your company's domain, run the following query:
```
The query doesn't result from the goal, it is a way to achieve it.
Also, is this for a single user or for any user where the `WHERE` condition is true? If the latter, the part about should be about `users` not `a user`.

   ```sql
   UPDATE user
   SET first_name='redacted'
   WHERE email NOT LIKE '%@yourcompany%'
   ```

>    Adapt and run that query for all fields that need to be sanitized.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Adapt and run that query for all fields that you need to sanitized.
```
Just to be a little more direct.

>    If you modified fields that shouldn't have been altered, [you can restore them from the previously taken dump](../administration/backup-and-restore.md#restore).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   If you modify fields that you shouldn't alter,
   [you can restore them](../administration/backup-and-restore.md#restore) from the dump you took in step 1.
```

>    You can create a script to automate the sanitization process to be able to run it in [your deployment hook](../user_guide/reference/platform-app-yaml.html#hooks):

Reviewer: I'm not sure where that link should go.

Also, given the `:`, tI would break this into two sentences or at least ideas. One about creating the script and the second about adding it to your `deploy` hook.

    ```yaml
    deploy: |
      cd /app/public

>       if [ $PLATFORM_ENVIRONMENT = "main" ]; then

Reviewer: The check should be by environment type.

        # Do whatever you want on the production site.
      else

>         # The sanitization of the database should happen here (since it's non-production)

Reviewer: I'd include a command to run a script from a file. Just to show something clearer.

      fi
    ```

<--->

---

> title=When using Drupal

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title=With Drupal
```
Or perhaps even: With Drupal and Drush (or the other way around). I'm not certain 100% of Drupal users use Drush, though I imagine it's the vast majority.

file=none
highlight=false
---

> 1. Take a [database dump](../configuration/services/mysql/_index.md#exporting-data). In this guide production data won't be altered, consider it merely as a safety precaution. Run `platform db:dump -e staging` to get a database dump of your staging environment,

Reviewer: The comments above about semantic line breaks and the last part of the last sentence apply here, too.

Also, I'd change
> In this guide production data won't be altered, consider it merely as a safety precaution.
to something like
> You won't alter your production data. This is just a safety precaution.

The bit about it being a safety precaution is good and probably should be added above, too.
Also, if it's true for both paths, you could consider taking it out of the codetabs and having it only once.

> 1. With Drupal, you can use [the `drush sql-sanitize` command](https://www.drupal.org/project/database_sanitize) to sanitize your database and get rid of sensitive, live, information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To sanitize your database and get rid of sensitive, live information, use [the `drush sql-sanitize` command](https://www.drupal.org/project/database_sanitize).
```

"With Drupal" is already part of the title of this tab. In a how to guide, you want to avoid "you can" as much as possible. Aim for directness.

> Add the sanitization of the database script in [your hook](../user_guide/reference/platform-app-yaml.html#hooks) for the non-production environment:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Add your script to sanitize the database to [a `deploy` hook](../user_guide/reference/platform-app-yaml.html#hooks) for non-production environments:
```
Again not sure about the link

  ```yaml
  type: php:7.0
  build:
  flavor: drupal
  hooks:
  build: |
    # Whatever you want to do during the build phase.
  deploy: |

>     cd /app/public

Reviewer: The indentation should be fixed. Not sure things like this essentially empty `build` hook need to be included. Showing only the relevant parts should be enough.

>     if [ $PLATFORM_ENVIRONMENT = "main" ]; then

Reviewer: This check should be for environment type.

      # Do whatever you want on the production site.
    else
      drush -y sql-sanitize --sanitize-email=user_%uid@example.com --sanitize-password=custompassword
    fi
    drush -y updatedb
  ```

{{< /codetabs >}}

## What's next

> In this guide you learned how to remove sensitive data from a database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this guide, you learned how to remove sensitive data from a database.
```
I personally dislike "in this guide" formulations, but I understand not everyone shares that view.

> To keep meaningful data, you could add a `faker` in the process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To keep meaningful data, you could add a `faker` to the process.
```

I'd try to avoid "keep" because you don't want to keep the data that exists. You're trying to replace it with other data.

> A `faker` is a program that generates fake data that looks "real".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A `faker` is a program that generates fake data that looks real.
```

It can be used to replace sensitive data with fake data.

> Having meaning full PII-free data allows you to keep your current Q&A processes, external reviews, ...

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Having meaningful PII-free data allows you to keep your current Q&A, external reviews, and other processes.
```

> To add a faker, consider adapting the queries ran previously to replace each value that contains PII by a new value generated by the faker.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To add a faker, adapt your sanitizing queries to replace each value that contains PII with a new value generated by the faker.
```

> You might also want to make sure that you [implement input validation](https://cheatsheetseries.owasp.org/cheatsheets/Input_Validation_Cheat_Sheet.html#goals-of-input-validation).

Reviewer: This is addressed above. Does it need to be here twice? Maybe here is a better place than above?

> If your database contains a lot of data, consider using the `OPTIMIZE TABLE` query to reduce it's size,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If your database contains a lot of data, consider using the `OPTIMIZE TABLE` query to reduce its size,
```

> as recommended in [MySQL's reference manual](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/optimize-table.html)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
as recommended in [MySQL's reference manual](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/optimize-table.html).
```

> as recommended in [MySQL's reference manual](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/optimize-table.html)

Reviewer: I'm not sure of the relevance here. It's a good general recommendation, but how does it fit here?
